---
layout: post
title:  On the best first job
---

I'm a new developer and recent code school graduate. ... I know I have solid skills as a developer, and I know I'm teachable. How do I find a company willing to mentor me when I have so little "real world" experience?
 
The first thing to do is to reverse the way we're thinking and talking about the situation. You aren’t trying to find a company willing to mentor someone who is inexperienced—you are trying to find a company who recognizes the value you bring with your potential, your personality, your dedication to growth and your unique life experience. You are looking for a company that deserves to have you as a fresh, vibrant, promising part of their team. At the very, very least, you are looking for a company that will give you the opportunity to learn hard lessons about what you want and don’t want throughout the course of your career. In any case, you are the arbiter of your future, not them. It may not seem to be the case to you right now, but it is, and it’s an important distinction to start out with.
 
The next step is to identify what it is you have to offer so that you can tell them about it. Do not limit yourself to what you think they want to hear. You are more than a laundry list of technologies. Describe your technical skills proudly and accurately, but don’t forget to mention anything else you could bring to the role that doesn’t always get mentioned. What other kinds of jobs have you had? What are your interests? How are your communication skills? What are your goals? What do you like about development? What don’t you like about development that you want to improve, internally or externally? What do you want to build? Why do you want to build? It’s not just about what you know how to do at this particular point in time. It’s about the whole of who you are, what you’re capable of doing and where you’re going.
 
Some practical ways, outside of an interview, to express what you have to offer are: writing on a blog, giving lightning talks at local meetups, contributing to open source projects (even documentation is necessary and welcome) and volunteering to help with introductory classes in the community. All of this lets the rest of the community get a sense of who you are as a person, what you're learning, how you're learning, and it might even bring companies to you.
 
Here’s the thing that might be frustrating in the beginning but which will pay off down the road—if you limit yourself to a narrow definition of value, and if you focus on finding a company that only wants you to fulfill narrow needs, you will not find the place in which you can flourish. Even if you take a job for the reasons I mentioned earlier, learning hard lessons, you should do it with awareness and deliberation, not because you think it’s all you can get. Inversely, if you try to find a company who responds to the qualities that make you different from everyone else, they will likely be a much better place for you to work and learn.
 
So, focus on who you are beyond the technical skills, and express that clearly and confidently in the context of your technical skills. What's beyond is what will make you stand out and is what will find you the environment where you should truly be.
