---
layout: post
title: On speaking up
---

I am a young woman software developer, and I work in consulting building custom software for various clients with various teams.  I often find that project managers prefer to direct questions towards my male colleagues, and sometimes that my male colleagues tend to talk over me rather than listen to my own knowledge.  This is especially frustrating in moments when I am confident that I have a better technical understanding of the problem.  My approach is to just present myself well, and make sure that the things I say are communicated as clearly as possible.  Eventually I can earn that trust.  However, when I switch projects and teams that long process starts over again.  How do I push myself out there and make myself heard?

I can tell from your phrasing that you have taken on the responsibility of solving this issue yourself, which is completely understandable and will perhaps be necessary, in the end. But, first, I would recommend seeing what you can do to call in backup to adjust the playing field so that you're not doing so much of the corrective work on your own. In short: I don't believe this is your problem to solve, but, unfortunately, you have may have to.

I'm not certain if you're working independently or with a consulting company, but, if it's the latter, this is an issue you should bring up to management. I know that may be uncomfortable, but one awkward conversation with them about being devalued is better than a perpetual series of struggles with clients and teams. Everyone at the company is responsible for the environment and culture they are operating in, not just you, and management can and should take a stronger role in making clear to all employees and clients how to treat and support their team members. If you're not being respected or utilized fully, that's everyone's problem, and it's a huge one that will eventually impact the entire company culture and output. If you work independently, then you are essentially your own management and you can make messaging this a part of your own personal onboarding process. Virtually all of the consulting experiences I've had have laid the ground "rules" for communication and roles with the team and the client at the start of the project. You are within your rights to, up front, describe what your role is and what part you expect to play during the project's course. Put it in writing if necessary.

The best-case scenario in asking for backup is that your team and company are all, "Whoa, we totally didn't realize we were doing that, our bad. We're going to get better at this, let us know if we screw up again." However, I recognize that this isn't the only possible outcome. The other potential results are that 1) they blow you off, 2) they get defensive, or 3) they call you some variant of "bitch"—bossy, overbearing, out-of-line, inappropriate, whiny, etc. Or a combination of all three.

Now, I'm from the Fey/Poehler school of ["bitches get stuff done,"](http://cdnpix.com/show/imgs/b2b2b3e2d4f623c864ff65af25a48f4f.jpg) so, personally, I'd go with the third option. You talk a lot. You talk louder. You talk over them. You lift your chin and square your shoulders and call out the PM who doesn't bother to ask you for your input. Ask them specifically why they keep asking only the men when you have the same role. (I learned how to assume an air of authority after I had a kid. I realized several years into being a mother that I had started expecting everyone to listen to the things that I said and when they didn't have a good reason for not doing it, I expected to know why. So maybe borrow a kid for a while? I don't know. Maybe not.) 

But I understand this option is not without its downsides, and I probably wouldn't have been able to do that when I was younger. I'm still working on it now. So this leaves you with two practical options: grit your teeth and deal with it, or find a better place to work. I would not recommend the second option. In fact, I'm going to specifically recommend against that. But finding a more supportive work environment that is sensitive to these sort of things is definitely possible. Most of my work experience has been in consulting companies who took the way their employees were treated very seriously. I knew principals who would sit in on meetings with difficult clients and made sure no one was overlooked. If you aren't getting the support you need where you are, chances are you can find it elsewhere.

Ideally, your journey to greater assertiveness involves both external support and internal effort. Knowing what you deserve is the best first step. It sounds to me like you do know that and are prepared to fight for it. The more practice you get doing that, the easier it will come and the more you'll eventually attract the people who can help you do your best work.

_Bonus advice for everyone! Sign up for Kelly Sue DeConnick's "Bitches Get Shit Done" texts and my personal badass heroine Kelly Sue will text you daily and tell you to get to work. [Signup details at her FAQs.](http://kellysue.tumblr.com/faq)_
