---
layout: post
title: On how to write
---

What is your writing process like? How do you brainstorm for your weekly piece? And how did you find your writing voice?
 
Like most writerly folk, I love to write about writing. So this is basically the best series of questions ever. I apologize in advance for the length, and for the strength of opinions, which will likely be very long and very strong, respectively.
 
My writing process generally begins on paper. I have probably mentioned many times before my affection for paper—it was available to me when nothing else was when I was young, and so that’s what I learned to reach for. The act of putting pen to paper is a sacred one to me. The more important the writing, the more it needs to be on paper first. For a very personal essay, I usually do an entire draft on paper, then a second draft by typing it. For pieces that don’t have the same emotional pull, I might just sketch out a few points or an opening/closing line on paper before moving to the computer to flesh it out, and editing it as I go. I usually write in the early mornings, or if I get some time over lunch or in the evenings. I write quickly. That comes from practice. I think both writer’s block and inspiration are bullshit. You write what you can write and then you rewrite it. The only essential part of any writing process is that you write as much as you can when you can.
 
For my weekly essays, I keep a perennial list of topics that I dip into when I have none other in mind. But I more often I pay attention to what’s in my mind that week. There is usually some happening, external or internal, that I have something to say about. My newsletter essays are generally so straightforward that they don’t require a lot of a brainstorming. I find a topic, and write about it. If I pick a topic early in the week, I might write a paragraph a day until the end. If I don’t pick one until the end of the week, I might write the entire essay Friday morning. But I’m rarely at a loss for any topics at all. I’ve kept notebooks for years with notes of ideas that interest me, and I almost always have something to say about anything and everything.
 
There is only one way anyone finds their writing voice: lots of reading and lots of writing. I don’t read as much as I used to, although that wouldn’t really be possible anymore because growing up I spent about 85% of my time reading. I read everything I could get my hands on. I had cards to the libraries in the two tiny Ohio towns I grew up in between and I regularly hauled out stacks of books that reached to my chin. I scavenged flea markets and thrift stores for cheap paperbacks. At one point in my teenage years, my bedroom was basically just a personal library that held over five hundred books—I know because I catalogued them, because, clearly, I was a super cool and really socially adept kid (also, that number doesn’t include my multiple longboxes of comic books, just to put an even finer point on that). But the result is that I learned how words work. I learned what it sounded like to use certain words for certain effects and messages, which made it easy for me to duplicate and build on and craft what I wanted to say in the way I wanted to say it. If you want to write, you have to read.
 
You also have to simply write. Writing skill is a muscle. The only way to develop it is to use it. Sometimes I get frustrated by the amount of pomp and circumstance that mythologizes the writing process. The quickest way to set me off is to ask what tools or environment or mindsets you need to write. Nope, nope, nope. You don’t need certain software. You don’t need a fancy pen. You don’t need a nice desk. You don’t need the right music. You don’t need a bustling coffee shop. You don’t need total silence. You don’t need inspiration. You need _nothing_. The only thing you need to do is to sit your ass down wherever you are whenever you can and write today and tomorrow and the next day and forever into the future. That is the only way you will ever feel comfortable expressing your thoughts in writing (and, spoiler alert, even then only a relative comfort is ever achievable). 
 
I’ll add one more bit to finding your voice—you need to concentrate on developing, or locating externally, a good editing voice. That’s what I am working most on now (she says in paragraph six of an answer to a two-line question). You’ll form a sense of what is the right way to put words together through reading and writing, but, eventually, you need a strong editing instinct to make your words as clear as they can be. Or an actual editor who tells it to you straight.
 
I like to demystify the writing process not only because I love it, but because I genuinely believe it’s accessible to anyone who wants it. You don’t have to become a professional novelist, or lock yourself away in a room or isolated cabin, or even have anyone read or like what you write, in order to enjoy expressing yourself in words. In the age of the internet, that becomes even truer. My first website, made in 2000 with AOL Hometown’s WYSIWYG editor, was a collection of my short stories. No one read what I wrote on the internet until recently, ten or fifteen years later. You can just write and like writing and put your writing into the world in some form and that’s great.
 
On my left forearm, I have tattooed a quote from my one true love, Jack Kerouac: “Write in recollection and amazement for yourself.” That’s all you need. So go do it.
